[Music]
everybody welcome to another episode of
conversations with Tom I'm here with
Dave Rubin what is that my man welcome
to the show Tom it's good to be with you
I'm just hunkered down in the fort over
here just trying to avoid the
coronavirus zombies and whatever other
apocalyptic things are happening outside
who knows at the moment it's raining
here in LA we already yeah very
apocalyptic for sure this is a super
weird time man how do you think about
what's going on given that you have a
book tour which we can see over your
shoulder don't burn this book launching
a book right now I have a lot of friends
who are doing it it seems like a rough
way to have to launch the book how are
you thinking about that why didn't you
push it off what's the thinking yeah
well I should say had a book tour and we
will have one in the future but the
current book tour which of course was
supposed to launch on April 28 the day
that the book comes out in New York City
that has been indefinitely postponed and
you know we'll see over the next couple
months as things slowly get back to
normal when we can start doing that and
you know at this point after being
trapped in the house for so long
although this is my home my studio is in
my home and I work from home and my my
crew comes to my home to work and all
that you know everyone's getting a
little stir-crazy and my hope is when we
get on the other side of this thing that
we're gonna have like a little feeling
of the roaring 20s where people are
gonna want to be out and about again and
will want to go to public events and
comedy shows and speaking tours and
restaurants and all that stuff and you
know it'll be good for the economy but I
think more than anything else it'll be
good for the the human spirit I did have
a call a couple weeks ago with all the
top brass at penguin Random House and
they said you know do you want to delay
the delay the book and we just don't
know if what's gonna happen we're
shipping and we don't know if people
will be at the stores and all of those
things and you know my feeling is this
is the first book I've ever written I I
finished the book last July so July of
2019 and then you know you add it for a
couple months but really I stopped
touching the book probably right around
Thanksgiving of 2019 you know we're in
April now so I've been sitting on this
thing for a long time the ideas that I
talk about in the book I think are
mostly
timeless ideas but you know like anyone
that that does anything when you do
something you create something it's a
piece of art it's a book it's a comedy
skit whatever it might be you build
something you don't want to sit on it
forever you want to do it and kind of
get it out there so that you can move on
to do other things and I'm very proud of
the book but I basically said to them we
got to get it out let's get it out I
think it's I think actually I didn't
anticipate Corona nobody anticipated
Corona but I think the ideas that I talk
about in the book are very related to
what we're seeing right now with you
know government stimulus packages and
federal shutdowns and borders and a
series of the other things that I talk
about so my feeling is you just move
forward you keep moving forward I do
know that a lot of books were delayed
and canceled and yeah maybe it's gonna
hit us and hurt us a little bit in the
bookstores if they're still closed in
certain states and things like that
but fortunately there is online we've
got an e-book we got a you know the
voice-over version and and we'll see
what happens but I just think you gotta
move you can't just wait till
everything's perfect because perfect
never comes yeah that is that is a very
fair statement I don't know so I've I
technically have a book deal I have
continued to refuse the advance because
I the amount of time that it takes to
sit down and write the book the amount
of time that it takes to go out and
promote the book I'm super conflicted
and that is the right word I'm
conflicted about it I want to do it and
I don't want to do it it's kind of how I
feel about kids so my wife and I don't
have kids and what I've always said is
that I actually really want kids like I
really want kids and I used to Big
Brother for this kids like eight half
years I know what it's like the good and
the bad and the only thing that I want
more than I want to have kids is to not
have kids and that's that's where I'm at
with the book it's like I put out so
much video content that is exactly what
I would write in the book and so it's
like man I'm already putting so much
time and energy into those ideas those
thoughts trying to get them out of the
world in a way that I can constantly
adjust them and revamp them and the
thought of sitting down for
you know God on the short side six
months I mean if I'm just absolutely
murdering it or a year which is probably
more likely given how slowly I write to
you know concretize the ideas and get
them in a way that I can put out so it's
like the only thing I want more than to
actually put those ideas out of the
world in that way is this they'll have
the time to do something else come I
hear yeah I mean I definitely hear yeah
right like we exist very much in the
same space I'm putting out a ton of
stuff and it's not just the videos but
whatever I'm doing on social media and
touring and you know speaking of
colleges and all that stuff and when
this thing was presented to me and it
was presented to me I didn't I didn't
ask for it one day we started getting a
bunch of calls and you know some of the
the publishing houses you know wanted to
make this happen my feeling again
because I do believe in this you just
keep moving forward was oh there's a
great opportunity here and I'll just
figure out how to make it work and
somehow even though right now in the
last few years of my life I've been
busier than I've ever been I just you
kind of just figure out a way it's a
little bit of Jeff Goldblum in Jurassic
Park like life finds a way you know and
you find a way to do it and I basically
for the so for me it was about a six
months six month process of writing but
basically what I would do is I'd wake up
I'd let my dog out to pee I'd make some
coffee and I'd go into the green room
which is because my studio is in my
house one of the bedrooms is the green
room where the guests come in and can
chill out before the show and get makeup
and all that and that became my office
and I basically closed the door at about
8 a.m. and often right until about 2:00
or so without eating nothing I would
just go go go go go and every now and
again my husband would open the door and
just like slide in a plate of food as if
I was in like maximum security because
he'd realized that you got to eat and
then I would be like wow you know I am
hungry and I didn't even realize it but
it's funny that you talk about it framed
within having kids because when I when I
handed in the manuscript in July it felt
like what I can only presume a little
bit of what giving birth is like like
you you've worked on this thing for
months you know you if you're if you're
the woman you know pregnant you've eaten
right like I gave this thing every
then you give it you sort of put it
there and then the weird thing is for a
book that the next thing that you do
with it is you start dissecting it so
it's an odd thing because it's like you
birth this thing and then the first
thing you have to do is operate on the
birth which is a really weird process
and and you know obviously the editing
part and all that is extremely it's it's
very technical and you move things
around and then you have to you know
battle out some of the ideas but I can
tell you this and I suspect it would be
the same for you if you can figure out
how to carve out that time the rewards
that I now feel for this thing like I
feel like it's more it's more timeless
than say just doing interviews or video
content on a daily basis it's a way of
crystallizing your ideas and and
challenging you know like little things
that I thought maybe were maybe left
unsaid or I hadn't fully come around on
one idea or why do I really think this
about taxes why do I really think that
this should be the cutoff point on
abortion and how does that compare to a
pure pro-life position or a pure
pro-choice position all of those things
if you like what you're doing it's fun
working through those things so I really
did enjoy the process actually even
though it's work it's it's definitely
work and it's exhausting and and you
will hit writer's block and all of that
stuff the process I think if you can get
through it and you have something to say
it's definitely worth it yeah when it
comes to writing the book for me it is
it's really a trade off so if I'm gonna
be spending that time on that there's
something else that I'm not spending my
time so I've become known so ironically
when I started all of this I thought I
would be the business guy and I thought
that's where everybody was going to you
know be interested in what I had to say
and as I was trying to explain to people
how to build a business I kept coming
back to dude first you have to get your
head right like if you're not thinking
in the right way you're gonna miss all
these opportunities that there's like
this foundational layer of stuff and so
I started going into that just as like
okay once you have that in place now I
can talk to you about business
principles but the thing I struggle with
my employees the most the thing that I
went through myself was all this mindset
layer stuff how to think problem solving
mode
focusing on the problems instead of the
solutions the ability to generate
momentum to not be emotionally
devastated by criticism like all these
things that [__] people up like I've
always told people boredom kills more
entrepreneurs than anything like all the
sudden financial difficulties all that
the thing that eats entrepreneurs alive
is your friends are out partying and
you're at home working on like some
really boring [__] like I remember dude
I don't get mad very easily when we were
so I had left quest we were launching
impact theory and getting an EIN number
a tax ID I was about to [__] punch
through a wall I was like this is the
most deeply inefficient system I have
ever encountered in my life and it is so
enraging when you're small and you're
trying to like get something going
you're trying to get momentum going and
you've got to [__] pay your employees
but you can't pay your employees until
you have a tax ID dude I was literally I
wanted to tear my hair out as somebody
with a couple of businesses now so I've
had to get a couple ein zand then you
know you have to wait for the ein to get
the bank account open and then sometimes
the thing gets lost in the mail we had
that happen once and then you gotta wait
on the phone with the IRS which I don't
have to get into that I mean all of
those things and the funny thing is of
course they're there side issues for
anyone that's really trying to
accomplish something those are the
things that you have to do to build the
business behind what it is you really
want to do I actually think one of the
things that I'm most proud of is that
all of the issues that I talk about on
the show related to freedom related to
Liberty related to getting rid of
regulation and owning your life and
individual rights and all of these
things and low taxes so that people can
flourish those are the exact things that
I've imported into my business here so
you know we're in a really really
difficult challenging economic time and
at every other level beyond economic but
my business I have three businesses now
but my business meaning the Rubin report
and the production company behind it
we're absolutely thriving right now
which is which is great and it's but
it's not a coincidence it's because I've
always made sure
to a take good care of my employees so
that right now and everybody is working
from home I know they're really working
and that they have a vested interest in
seeing us succeed and if they've needed
us to buy them equipment my director
works remotely now we make sure we get
everybody stuff we don't cheap out on
things we pay a hundred percent of all
of their and their dependents health
insurance the way we've run everything
here that our company has no debt we
just hired somebody I mean in the midst
of coronavirus I just added a new
associate producer all of those things
that I'm very proud of they're not
coincidences they're from doing exactly
what you said there you got to get your
head on straight first know know what
you think and why you think it and then
that's a sort of beautiful thing because
I didn't ever think of myself as a as a
businessman in any way the fact that I
now run this company that that funds and
produces this this was the goal but I
actually like all that other stuff now
because then it's like oh these things
aren't just ideas talking about low
taxes and why that will help you thrive
it's not just an idea it's actually when
you put it into practice and I go wait
if my taxes are lower I can actually
hire more people thus helping the
economy and I can pay for more their
insurance or whatever it is it's a
pretty beautiful thing and it's funny
because I I will often see that people
let's say my my ideological opponents so
like the the real progressive types
they're always screaming about unions
for example and often you find as is
with my my former employer that's a big
YouTube channel they scream about unions
for everybody else all day and then it
comes out in the news a couple weeks ago
that their own employees are trying to
unionize and they're fighting them tooth
and nail again and it's like yes and but
that's so consistent I think with what
comes out of a certain version of the
political machine these days and what I
wanted to do was say something that was
true and then as a byproduct of that I
was able to create something good which
is a pretty beautiful thing so it's it's
super interesting I've always avoided
politics I think partly because I don't
find it very interesting
partly because the culture wars has
become literally crazy so as what all
refer to as a culture war ISM you being
what I would consider in the [__]
middle of all of that maybe will
describe the definition but yeah that
was all happened what so far I was it
was kicking off I was building business
so I just had my head down so for
basically two decades I just had my head
down I was working that was it I'm
trying to go businesses I was so bad in
the beginning at being an entrepreneur
that it was just like constant panic
mode for years and years and years I
didn't even have time to sort of look up
and you know think about what I think at
at a higher level then as you're
building businesses and it's real and
your house is on the line and you start
looking at especially living in
California of the insane
tax rates it starts to to be a little
bit more you start having sort of
background opinions this is not an area
I feel like I'm I'm well thought out it
was very interesting to read your book
and to see all of your ideas laid bare
walking people through exactly what you
think one I'd love to know like have you
always been drawn to this and how do you
deal with this sort of what all call
glutton for punishment mode that you're
in I've seen videos of people hanging
you interrupting your talks you go to
college estill which seems like madness
what what is it that draws you to this
and makes it worth sort of all the
difficulty yeah so I'll do the first
part first which is have I always been
interested in this you know it's funny I
didn't really realize that until I was
writing this book because I was a
political science major in college and
and I remember in eighth or ninth grade
it was the 19 1988 presidential election
was Michael Dukakis versus George HW
Bush it seems like many lifetimes ago
and we did a mock election in my class
and I had to I was like the campaign
manager for Dukakis and Dukakis was the
liberal and the Democrat and he was the
good guy and Bush was there evil
Republican and they care about war and
money and he was the bad guy that's I
think where the the real political thing
started but under that I would say and I
write about this in the book my
Emily was always it's not that anyone in
my family was in politics but we just
always kinda talked about everything so
at holidays we'd have big tables with
aunts and uncles and grandparents and
grandkids and nieces and nephews and the
whole thing like everybody else and
friends and we would be arguing about
everything I mean arguing about foreign
policy arguing about abortion arguing
about taxes the immigration everything
that now we all talk about and really
somehow in my family dessert would be
served and everyone would just kind of
forget it like it was just like nobody
held a grudge over politics we had we
had family grudges you know that that
often could last a generation or two in
terms of interpersonal relationships
that kind of stuff but I never saw
anyone storm out of a meal because of a
political disagreement or even even
really yelling at each other you know it
would get heated sometimes but I never
saw that and I think that that ability
to to do that dance to be able to talk
to people and understand that people
think differently and then you still
break bread with them they're still your
family I think that just got embedded
into my DNA somehow so I think that
that's part of it and then as far as
like being you know in the eye of the
storm or a glutton for punishment with
all this I mean look if you're gonna do
anything good in this world it is gonna
come with a certain cost you know if you
if you are going to try to say something
true try to say something that you
believe it is going to come with people
yelling at you people trying to silence
you D platform you potentially
physically try to stop you they'll try
to go for your job I mean there's
there's a million examples of this over
the course of time you know scientists
you know hundreds of years ago talking
about new scientific theories and having
religious authorities go after them
anyone anyone anywhere that tries to
innovate and do something good you're
gonna have people push against you you
know what Tesla was trying to do and
basically destroyed by Edison I mean
there's there's so many examples of this
kind of thing so all of that stuff you
know when you see these videos there's
the one that really went viral where I
was at the University of New Hampshire
and I'm basically tell
a bunch of kids that you know you should
live free and let's appreciate America
let's agree to disagree I mean that was
the message and they're screaming at me
and they bring noisemakers and you know
they chant and they they would pick
times because they would set it up in
their phones so that every few minutes a
bell would go off so different kids knew
when to stand up and interrupt in chant
and I would literally there's a moment
people can find it on YouTube where I
would go I was literally I don't know
maybe eight feet away from these two
people and their moms lessly chanting
and I'm standing in front of them but
they refuse to look at me they won't
look at you in the eye I kept saying
guys I'm right in front of you if you
have a question for me or a comment or a
thought you know feel free to tell me
I'm right here and they wouldn't even
look at me because they don't even want
to think that they're that their
opponent is human so all of those things
they're not really fun in the midst of
it you know like it's not I don't think
I'm combative by Nature I mean you know
you see the way I do interviews I'm not
here to really fight with people I am
interested in in talking to people but
some of that just comes with the
territory and actually I wouldn't have
thought this maybe three years ago but I
now think this that if it wasn't for a
lot of those slings and arrows I don't
know that I could be where I am right
now because now when the hit pieces come
or the New York Times says something
stupid about me or box or HuffPo or the
butt or BuzzFeed or any of these things
it's like now first off I have an army
of people who defend me before I even
have to defend myself but I also know
that these people haven't taken me out
they haven't taken me out and if
anything they've helped me strengthen my
resolve and I think you know what
doesn't kill you makes you stronger and
I think a lot of people need to hear
that and that's why so much of the book
is about you know get your [__] together
basically so that you can face the mob
one day because otherwise whatever it is
that you believe that isn't mainstream
that isn't just the automatic woke
opinion of the day you're never gonna
say it and do you want to be the type of
person in your life that doesn't say
what they think most people don't I
don't we get cowed into fear with that
but I don't want to be that person and
that's why I was really trying to write
this book one thing that I found along
those lines really interesting in your
book and I didn't know this part of your
story at all
was that you didn't come out for a very
long time as being gay and then it was
causing you massive would you categorize
it as anxiety or depression like one
what would you categorize it as and then
to how did you end up there if you had
this family it seemed pretty open you
guys talked about everything that was it
that made you afraid to be open about
that you know it's an inside job it
really it's an inside job meaning even
if even if the world is totally open to
you whatever that means to you your when
you're in the closet and by the way you
know and I talked about this in the book
the closet we only think of the closet
as you can be closeted about your
sexuality my point in the book is you
can be closeted about many different
things and I think many people right now
are politically closeted people who have
just very basic decent political beliefs
are afraid to say what they think if
you're afraid to say what you think to
your family to your friends whatever it
is you are closeted in a way so that's
why I make that a metaphor in the book
you know I think partly they're looking
back there were probably a couple things
you know first off gay you know it's a
little hard for people now in 2020 to
remember what it was like in 2000 in
1990 1980 19 whatever the stigma that
was attached to being gay and nobody
really wants to be the other nobody
wants to you know it's like in
retrospect now I see why there's so many
reasons that maybe by being the other in
this regard by having this other thing
about me that it did help shape a
certain tolerance from me it did help
shape my belief in the individual it did
help shape my belief that we can be
different and still love each other or
at least not kill each other so I don't
regret it now but I think I did part of
it was that there were no gay role
models in a way you know there was
RuPaul or there were like over the top
you know every cliche gay ridiculous
character that you can think of and by
the way even now there aren't many gay
role models you know there's a couple
gay people on TV someone like Anderson
Cooper who all the gay people in New
York City knew he was gay but was
closeted way later and I I oddly became
resentful of him because I was out at a
certain point and he was still closeted
and it was like why am I doing the dirty
work for Gloria Vanderbilt's
who's worth hundreds of millions of
dollars and on CNN every night but I
would say I also didn't because I'm not
flamboyant or something like that
and I like basketball and I like
videogames and I like Star Wars and
things that are not thought of as gay
whatever that means I think that made me
kind of feel like a freak
sort of because you know like it's a
weird thing it's like it's funny because
like when you think back on how you used
to think sometimes it's like wow it's
crazy that I used to think that way but
I think it partly was that I was like
like I knew who I wanted to like sleep
with or whatever but that was different
than every other part of me that anyone
knew and for a long time I just had a
hard time reconciling those things I
thought gay meant you love Madonna and
you like to do ecstasy and go to clubs
and go to theater and I don't like any
of those things although I did do
ecstasy once at a Madonna concert and I
didn't really have a great time so you
know I think it's just an inside job and
and at some point you know I described
in the book that when I was really
closeted your ability to even see what's
real starts to change because if you're
hiding yourself all the time you need to
be real so that you can exchange reality
with other people so like right now and
we're all trapped in our houses I'm
actually quite worried for mental health
going forward because it's cool that we
can do this right and hopefully people
listening or watching this can hear
something that we're saying and can then
mirror some truth off that they could go
I struggled with something similar or
that has no meaning to me or this guy's
nuts or whatever but the more that we
just are all distancing ourselves that's
why I don't like the phrase social
distancing because yes we have to
physically distance ourselves six feet
right now but the idea of social
distancing we're social creatures and
there's a reason for that we need it so
that we can keep going and keep learning
and growing and all of those things so
at the end of the day whatever it was
whatever it was that kept me there for a
long time it's funny I don't have any
regrets per se because I think whatever
whatever I went through got me to where
I am now which is good but I I guess my
one it's not quite a regret but I wish I
had been a little bit easier on myself
because you know you you put when you're
when you're not really being hard on
yourself about exactly well just that I
was gay I thought there was something
wrong with me you saw other like that
yeah I said well I saw it as bad or I
just saw it as like something there was
like a defect in me meaning my friends
were all very similar as me and we'd
play basketball and do all these things
and they all had girlfriends and it was
like there was something about me that
was flawed dude there's something really
interesting there so I've heard people
gay people that have come out of the
closet talked about that a lot and
they're maybe it's tied up in the very
notion of identity that there is some
sense of getting something echoed back
to you from other people that helps you
form your sense of identity we I really
want to understand that so you're
thinking that something is broken or
something is wrong is it simply like we
interpret different as being wrong when
we're young or like what do you think
that mechanism is that is so common that
so many people feel like that well look
there's something inherently I'm a
hundred percent Pro gay right so I'm
married to a man we've been together for
10 years we've been married for almost
five but you know the idea that say to
gay people can't procreate in a
traditional sense we're actually in the
process of having kids would be a
surrogate and an egg and the whole
shebang as we were yeah as we were
walking into the sperm bank it's kind of
funny it was like like the day before
like the full-on shutdown of Los Angeles
because of coronavirus so people are
like scattered and it's very weird out
and we're walking into the sperm bank to
deposit sperm and Dennis Rodman was
standing outside and I was like I will
never forget this it's like lockdown
date one and there's Dennis Rodman as
we're as we're walking in to deposit
sperm but I think I think that it brings
up all sorts of issues about how you
think about the world if you can't
procreate or even more important than
that I would say until gay marriage this
is why I think gay marriage was so
important regardless of how you feel
about gay people if you don't give
people the opportunity to be in some
sort of stable relationship that
everybody else can be in
leave them with you leave them with an
endless life of narcissism and chasing
after sex and all those things and I
used to live in West Hollywood which is
the gayest place on earth I mean they
have rainbow crosswalks this is the
gayest place on planet Earth
basically and you know one of the
saddest things there is you see all of
these guys who are you know 50s 60s 70s
possibly even over Oh older who come
from a time when there was no way they
could be in a functional relationship
and then and then you throw in the AIDS
crisis and everything else and then you
see that basically they've had to live
their lives just for their spray tan and
to work out and get hair plugs and wear
muscle shirts just because they have to
just get that next quest and that's a
really I I feel terrible I didn't like
going to the gym there because I'd often
just be focused on those guys like how
sad it was and and I think that that
concept related to the question you're
asking until gay marriage came out it
was it was sort of like well what kind
of future could I have I never really
thought about the future in a weird way
I just sort of did whatever I wanted to
do and that's not really a way to live
and that's why even in the book I lay
out some other beliefs that I now have
including why why I think the
time-tested stories even of the Bible
that I don't consider myself a believer
in a traditional sense but I think that
there are things outside of us that are
true and that our time-tested and
churned throughout the ages that helped
us flourish as a society I could have
never seen that the other way if I
didn't realize that I could have a
future so I think it I don't know I know
it's a little bit of a messy answer
because I don't know that there is a
great answer to it and I would also say
that you know like straight people and
everyone else all gay people are
different so some people so David my
husband he's he's 12 years younger than
me so he grew up in a time where when he
was in high school not only was he out
already
where I wasn't out until I mean I tell
it in the book but I literally came out
to the first person I ever came out to
at 12:30 a.m. in the Times Square subway
station on September 11th 2001 and then
I woke up I woke up a few hours later in
America was under attack but I was I was
already you know 25 years old he was out
much younger and
and he always says to me he's like well
I knew I was gonna be married I knew I
was gonna have kids in a family and the
rest of it and that's why equality is so
important because it's not that you're
giving people something special what you
want to do and what you want out of a
society is you want laws that treat
everyone equally and then you don't
force anyone to get married or you don't
force anyone to be single but if you
don't give people that opportunity and I
think this is where the the the
Republicans and conservatives really got
screwed up for many years they got so
obsessed with gay and gay marriage and
all these things well if you didn't
allow gay people to have functional
lives then actually you were gonna force
them to become all the things that you
thought that they were you know these
sex drug-crazed monsters or something
like that
and I don't know I think actually at
some level I lived with some of the
shadows of that because I know what I
was for some period of my life at least
and and it's it's very I think it's
great that now you know a kid could be
15 and say I like boys I like girls
whatever and generally people don't care
and maybe that kid when he's 21 will
think something else or whatever I think
these are all basically good things yeah
I think they're basically good things
man what a difference 12 years makes
that's a that's really interesting it's
cool to see that we're changing that
fast
heartbreaking like you said to know how
many people had to live a lie because it
really was dangerous and I mean I'm sure
there were places still in America where
it actually is still dangerous that's
heartbreaking one one thing I wanted to
follow up do that is so interesting I've
got to know so you guys are going to
have a child through a surrogate how do
you jump through the sperm to use so
this is actually happening right now we
just had a call like an hour ago with
the woman who's helped facilitating all
of the stuff so what we're trying to do
right now actually we have the surrogate
already we're about to settle on on the
egg donor so we haven't officially
settled on the egg donor yet but we both
deposited sperm and our goal is with
this we're going to take two eggs from
the donor his sperm my sperm and have
twins so by a
yeah yeah yeah wow that's cool then how
did you guys I mean okay so just pretty
straight down the middle fair one in one
that is really [__] fascinating do
you guys do you guys have like this one
hope for a boy one hope for a girl will
you guys slap that she can right you can
choose yeah you can do all sorts of
stuff I think they call it selective
elimination you could do all sorts of
things with interesting phrases like
that around them you know I actually
David definitely wants at least one boy
and I think his preference would be to
I'm I would really be okay with the boy
and a girl I don't think I want to girls
but I think a boy and a girl would be
totally fine two boys would be fine and
if it ends up being two girls it'll be
two girls I don't think we're gonna mix
with the magic of the universe or mess
with the magic of the universe - why not
magic of the universe or why not - girl
why not just the magic of the universe
you know once so once the egg hits the
sperm even though I do talk about my
feelings about abortion and I think you
know 12 weeks is the cutoff you know I
do believe that you you have at that
point the genesis of life and then we
could talk about you know five days in
is a blast this is really life and where
are you at and in four weeks and the
rest of it I I would just be we'd have
to have a serious conversation about
about what we would do then my hope
actually is that when we make that when
we do this and and the sperm meets the
egg and one and one and one if it I hope
that it's either two boys or or a girl
and a boy and you know we'll we'll go
from there so I think I may not
understand how the selection process
works so it's done after they fertilize
the egg I thought it was done at the
sperm level
no no it's done after they they don't
know the sex until they fertilized by
the way there's no silly questions
related to this because I can tell you
after being in with these fertility
doctors and the surrogacy people on the
egg deal and everything it's like this
is a whole other world there are so many
issues related to science and government
and and absolutely everything you can
think of and we all think we know oh you
know it must be just so easy
or just dragging a sperm throw it in
there you're good and it's like there's
so many things to think about what's the
most surprising
um well I guess more I don't know if
this is surprising exactly but the fact
that science can somehow pull all this
stuff off is actually pretty incredible
when when you see it like when we've
been to the fertility clinic and you
know you see oh and this is the
literally the machine that we use to
fertilize the egg with the sperm like
this is the device that science has come
up with to do that to make life like
that's pretty freakin incredible but I
would say also you know just the fact
that there are women out there like this
this young lady who we just chose to be
the surrogate who from everything I can
tell about her seems to be a really you
know wonderful person and she's married
with three kids and that she wants to
help she wants to help other people have
children that she's willing to give you
that tells business we have not met face
to face yet we're about to do a Skype
meeting okay meet her before you make
yeah so we we've seen fiction yeah we've
seen pictures of her we we've we've all
agreed that we're gonna do this you know
there's a we have a profile she has a
profile we go back and forth to ask
questions make sure we're some of the
things that were really important to you
like if I was gonna do this I would be a
psychopath about their diet and yeah
like their exercise like that would
family mental health issues like ah you
want to talk about like I actually love
that we're at a point where people can
take some control over this which I'm
sure people absolutely hate about me but
I find this [__] fascinating so
mental health diet exercise what were
some key factors for you yeah so in
terms of mental health and mental health
history
my feeling is that's far more important
on the egg side meaning that you want to
make sure that the the woman providing
the genetic material that she doesn't
have either any major physical diseases
or he's a carrier of all sorts of stuff
where that she comes from a family that
doesn't have a long history of mental
health or or cardiac problems or cancer
or you know a litany of other issues on
the surrogacy side it was
or is she well first it was just is she
in a stable home so this woman happens
to have three children three young
children we've seen plenty of pictures
everybody looks looks very happy she
looks fit you know she does some
exercise it seems like she basically
eats right we're not gonna force her you
know you can do all sorts of things or
if you want to throw in a ton more money
you can give them all the money in the
world for all organic food the entire
time and all that you know our basic
feeling was if she's healthy and does
exercise and has a family you know we
don't want her eating fast food all the
time so we've talked a little bit about
that it doesn't sound like she does too
much of it anyway but also knowing that
she had three kids that were all born
basically at 40 weeks that are seemingly
or not seemingly that are healthy and
everything else that was important on
the egg side it's why it's taken us a
little longer there it's like well also
coronavirus has actually really slowed
this process because you know people
aren't people aren't donating as much
right now they're not getting as many
surrogates they're you know there's a
hole which is the prize right now if you
could or would you wait and tell
coronavirus sort of settles out um well
that's been an ongoing discussion we're
sort of allowing the doctors to decide
the timeline here so it is possible that
I could find an egg literally when I end
this call with you and at this point we
have the surrogate and as long as the
doctor would be willing to do it which
some doctors are and some doctors aren't
and I'm not an expert in all of this
obviously I think we would be willing to
move in this because if we weren't then
it's like alright well what are we
really saying here is this thing gonna
last three more months six months nine
months it's like if we're it goes to
what I said earlier like I think you
just move forward and move forward and
move forward I think I got a little bit
of that from from Peter teal just like
keep going just keep going and so we
will see how the egg thing how that sort
of shakes out because yes you have to be
more careful about the genetic stuff
there the family history all you know I
want we found you know you look at these
it looks like dating websites basically
you know you're just swiping past all
this girl you know that's what it looks
like really it does and you're there to
you they're telling you all these things
about themselves what we've really found
is like I'm not that concerned about
saying IV
education I want somebody that's that's
educated hopefully went to college but
I'm actually we haven't even put too
much primacy on that it's basically we
want someone that looks healthy and fit
that is healthy and fit and that that
seems happy that that actually has sort
of driven us more than oh she you know
went to Yale and is that Stanford you
know Business School and blah blah blah
like I believe if we're good parents we
can we can teach the right things and
help on the education front and that the
genetic beginnings of that yeah that you
could be more predisposed of
predisposition you're gonna have more of
a predisposition let's put it that way
so yeah we're paying attention to all of
that stuff and you know you at some look
at the end of the day you just hope
you're making the right choices and then
you hope you're gonna be a decent parent
I guess so
what do you would a decent parent look
like like what are some core like so for
instance yeah I know that people would
if I had kids I'd really be in trouble
because I was spanked growing up I don't
have any beef with it I think a lot of
kids run write it today and so
thankfully I never have to like deal
with the societal backlash against that
but like what are some parents of
tenants of parenting that you subscribe
to or maybe that you worry about or you
haven't decided on like what are some
key things that you guys are debating
now you know it's funny we haven't
talked about it too specifically other
than we have come to realize that David
will definitely be more of the authority
figure and I'll kind of be more of the
fun one like that just seems to be like
the trend a little bit like even just
with our we have a new we have a new dog
now and like he's a year old we got him
the day that the that LA was closing all
everything because of the shutdown I saw
that the the shelters were closing and I
was like I just got to run there and we
had just lost our 16 year old dog to
cancer about a month ago and she lived
an incredibly wonderful life it was it
was truly magical but we were gonna wait
for a while probably for the fall
because I I had the book tour and I was
we were gonna be traveling a lot and you
know we wanted some time after after
Emma had had left us but then this thing
happened with Corona and
just like I'm just gonna run over to the
shelter and just see and we went to the
local shelter and there was this
beautiful gorgeous dog their
one-year-old pit mix who looked almost
exactly like Emma our previous dog that
was a total coincidence and he was about
to be put down that day the order had
already been signed and not because he
had any behavior problems or anything
else but these shelters are just
completely overrun and I was like that's
not happening and and we took him and
for the second he got here he's been
great and all that but I mentioned this
because he's fairly untrained and he's
young and sort of crazy and running
around and eatin socks on the rest of it
and David is much better at sort of
being the disciplinarian where I'm just
like I yeah you could get on the couch
you know oh you're standing on the
dining table that's fun you know and all
that kind of stuff so I don't know I
think basically though to be a good
parent what would be a good parent
that you would allow that kid to
hopefully make their own mistakes
without going too overboard in the
mistake Department you know you give
them as much of a leash to experience
life but knowing that there is a leash
you know not just throw them out into
the world and just Oh see what the hell
happens but you know and I think
actually what that probably comes down
to is if you're a pretty much a whole
person who has like some sort of
semi-coherent but hopefully mostly
coherent worldview then hopefully you
can raise a child just just by being
that just by being something that is
kind of sane and kind of stable and kind
of real I think you can model some of
that behavior but this would probably be
best if we pick this up in about 16
years we'll see if I'm even remotely
close to write about that yeah but I
think about how we were raising I think
we grow roughly at the same time so I
was able to so I grew up in Tacoma
Washington so it wasn't like Los Angeles
where I'm at now but yeah my mom would
let me ride my bike know like four miles
away five miles away and not even really
like think much about it it was just hey
I'm gonna you know hop on my bike and
ride there was like this dirt track that
me and my friends used to ride our bikes
to and when I think about how far away
that
really was and that you know that was
like nine or ten years old and that my
mom let me do that you would just listen
obviously not when I went that far but
normally we just be sort of wandering
around the neighborhood and when he's
dinnertime whatever my mom would whistle
you could hear the whistle really far
away
you could probably hear my mom's whistle
like a good half mile away and I just
you know come running home and and that
was that you live in LA so it's probably
a little bit different but like how do
you think of that like what kind of
physical freedoms how do you perceive
the level of apparent danger for kids
what do you think about like the I'm
sure you've read the book the coddling
of the American mind like where do you
fall and all this like letting kids I
assumed you were pointing to the book
yeah yeah where do you fall on that
stuff um well it's funny so I'm 43 how
well do 44 44 okay so we're basically
the same age and yes there's something
sort of magical I think when you think
back to our childhood I I grew up in
Long Island but but very much the same
thing was on my bike all day long I
don't know we were crossing highways and
doing crazy stuff and somehow we always
got home we didn't have cell phones I
didn't have a tracker you know on my leg
I don't know what my mom thought we were
doing I used to climb trees I always ask
this to my mom now I'd be like or to my
dad I'll be like you know I used to
climb that tree in front of the house
I'd be like 30 feet up there like a
monkey and you guys would just let me do
it there were no pads on the ground like
I could have broke my neck any and yeah
a series of insane things that we used
to do but nobody thought anything of it
and and actually at least in my
community everybody turned out basically
okay you know there weren't any major
accidents or anything like that that
feels very special and very different to
me than what it must be like now raising
a child and I think you know this goes
to this sort of helicopter parent thing
and that we're on top of them all the
time and now you know there because
you'll you'll give them a phone which is
a safety thing in a way so they can
communicate with you but also opens up a
truly sort of crazy Pandora's box of all
sorts of trouble that it could get them
in and a million other things you know
and you know so the phone I mean
technology like fire it's like it can be
used for a lot of good you can you
heat your house and cook your food but
it can also burn down that house and and
kill everybody so I would hope well
first off I don't know by the time we
really have the kids at an age where
they're running around I don't know that
we'll be here in the People's Republic
of California I may have saw well I mean
just tax wise in just the general state
of where this state is going with our
with our real far left the governor who
ruined
you know Newsom Gavin Newsom basically
ruined San Francisco I don't know the
last time you were up there but the
amount of homelessness and drugs there
it's it's absolutely disgusting you may
know that they literally have an app to
tell you what streets have human poop on
them so that you can download the app
get to SFO and avoid the human poop so
there's a lot of trends that I see here
in Los Angeles that I really don't like
what I do like about LA I love the
freakin weather it's it's beautiful
every day happens to be raining today
and when it does rain it's actually nice
because you're like oh that we do need
that but the weather is great and I have
a nice group of friends and and because
Pollak for me because politics and and
media are really media and I should say
entertainment are really becoming one
thing doing what I do is really great
here in Los Angeles I don't know that
we'll always be here though but you know
as far as what I would let them get away
with again it would be I would try to
you know give them that long leash and
then you know one day you come home and
you fell out of a tree and you know you
got a spike in your shoulder well maybe
you won't do it again but but all of
this you know it's it's a it's a more
intellectual exercise for guys like us
until we're actually doing it right yeah
but it this is you want to talk about an
intellectual exercise I think it's
really revelatory about who a human
being is it's one of the things like
always when I'm interviewing somebody
and they've got really strong beliefs
I'm always like what do you teach your
kids right like that's that I want to
know so you've got hey this universal
beliefs but the rubber meets road when
you have [__] kids and I want to know
like what are the big ideas you have you
distilled them you're trying to teach
your kids so for instance this is not
the reason I didn't have kids but it was
a factor man like when I think about my
natural personality so in my
relationship I would be the
disciplinarian a hundred percent and I
am super worried that I I know the
of hardship you have to have to be able
to especially as a guy to be able to
toughen the [__] up which is exactly
what I had to do I was so soft as a kid
my dad did not push me at all to deal
with physical pain did not tell me hey
stop [__] crying about it like the
pain can serve you you need to get
tougher never gave me that message I'm
sure out of love and affection but in
the end like I still had to learn those
lessons I just had to learn them really
[__] late in life after was causing
all kinds of problems for me that I was
so emotionally weak and so when I think
about I need to because my kids would
you know very lucky position but my kids
would grow up wealthy I did not grow up
locusts yeah my kids be really in
trouble of just me trying to like make
my own life what I wanted to be like
their life would be nice right far nicer
than the way that I had it's now they're
growing up soft and I'm [__] afraid
I'm legitimately afraid
did you watch oh god the first man it's
a show on Apple TV about what if a great
show by the way I think it's called the
first man and it's oh that's the Mars
thing yeah well it's what would have
happened to America had Russia beat us
to the moon it is [__] awesome but I
don't want to spoil it with lyrics I'm
sure dance around it a little bit but
there's a moment in there where a kid
has very the kind of trauma that would
impact your whole family and I thought
[__] that could have so easily been me
the way that my parents like dude I used
to go to my friend's house ride
motorcycles without helmets we used to
shoot bow and arrows straight up into
the air that's insane
but just the same thing a hundred
percent insane but nobody was majnu's
they were like hey there's a bow and
arrow go play there's a motorcycle play
like it is it is what's the phrase I
don't believe in God but it is but for
the grace of God that I made it out of
my childhood and man when I think about
it it's good though but what you end up
having is so my grandparents my
grandfather was one of like eight or
nine kids but I think only five made it
to adulthood so I think three of his
siblings died you know before the age of
eight or whatever not that people
thought of kids as disposable dude but
it was you just knew
that there was going to be some amount
of death involved and as you whittled
down the number of kids HAP's where
you're only having one kid or two kids I
know I would have that sense of like
this is precious man and I'm so [__]
afraid of something happening to this
child and so you know I'm gonna you know
do the the sort of corralling and
protective mechanism I don't know I just
worried about what that would that that
would actually end up creating a problem
and I just sort of weighed like what
would be worse mollycoddling them a
little bit to make sure that they get to
adulthood or the the trauma of losing a
child that's what freaked me out I mean
this is it's one for the ages right it's
one for how we even behave in our own
lives like you can we've all done crazy
[__] that we shouldn't have done right
we've all done drugs we shouldn't have
done or this behavior that behavior
whatever it is we've all done those
things and whether you came from a
family that was the helicopter parents
right on top of you you know it reminds
me of the episode of The Simpsons maybe
around season eight or nine or so when
Simpsons was still in those Corps years
when you find out they show you a
flashback to Flanders growing up and now
here he is the most sort of stiff dorky
religious conforming thought guy on the
planet and they show you his parents and
why did he become that way because his
parents were ultra hippies who gave him
no rules so what did little Ned Flanders
crave he craved rules and then he became
really religious and really obsessed
with rules and turning to the church for
everything and all that it's a little
bit of a caricature of the whole idea
but it's the right it's the right bones
for what we're talking about here it's
like you want to give them freedom and
then if you give them freedom they might
hurt themselves again at the same time
by giving them that freedom hopefully
you've you've shown them that in the
future if they act responsibly with
freedom that all sorts of good things
can happen on the other hand you can you
can hold them in and protect them from
the world but what might happen well now
you send them off to college you've done
you know a crazy job protecting them
from everything and now they get to
college they have one puff of a joint
and because they've been hidden from
everything next thing you know it's
three years later and they haven't moved
off the couch because they're a pothead
or much worse than that
so there's no I there really is no
perfect way here and then there's you
know this is this is it this is what
life is it's it's how you want to do
your life and then hopefully if you did
something kind of right that you can
then model that for the people behind
you but they have to make their own
mistakes too so what are some of the
beliefs like you have very clear beliefs
you laid them out in the book high
emphasis on freedom freedom of speech I
think you said in the book is an
absolute barring the things you said
that the Supreme Court has already ruled
on don't yell fire and no one citing
violence what are what are some core
values that you want to instill in your
kids yeah well real quick on that don't
yell fire one you know it's an
interesting thing that I had to Google a
bunch of times because it's a slight
misnomer that you can't yell fire in a
theatre
you actually can yell fire in a theatre
in a jokey way or in a certain context
you can't yell fire in a theater to
incite panic because then that becomes a
criminal problem that's like a very
minor sort of in the weeds thing but it
is an interesting one because you hear
people say it all the time and I used to
say it but it's really with the intent
to do harm in that case I so I lay that
out in that I'm for free speech with
with that caveat and then in the United
States we have the most slight cases
that are almost never used in case of
libel or slander which I do believe
should not be protected speech but
they're very rarely used because the bar
to prove them is so high that it never
happened
so I all of them I mean that's the thing
all of the beliefs that I've that I've
put into practice that I've talked about
on the show over the last couple years
I've sort of put into this book because
I didn't want to write something that
was purely what I'm against most people
know what I'm against already I don't
like socialism I don't like collectivism
I don't like top-down power I want
people to be free right you know how to
live your life the best way you can it
doesn't mean you're doing it all the
time it doesn't mean I'm doing it all
the time none of us are right we're not
we're not Jesus we have moments often
sometimes you might have moments where
it months go by and you're like whoa
I've been on a really good run
I fought some of my demons and I started
behaving better or doing all the things
I needed to do to really get in
the groove with life and then life kind
of moves moves smoothly and then you
have other times where you just [__] up
a zillion things or you lie or you cheat
or whatever it might be and then life
sets you off in in a different path but
I wanted to give people something that
wasn't just oh I'm against these bad
ideas but what am I really for and what
what it all really boils down to is I am
for the individual I believe that that
in any sort of free society but for our
context in an American society what we
have done better than any other country
in the history of the world is give more
people more freedom than anywhere else
everyone everyone in every corner of the
world has come to the United States and
in almost every case without exception
has made it better for themselves and
for their children it is very rare
almost impossibly rare that people
immigrated into the United States and
then left because they couldn't make it
here and they were like ah we're going
back to the other place nobody nobody
whether your ancestry is Irish or
Italian or Jewish or Chinese or Mexican
or whatever it is everyone comes here
and basically makes it better and that
is because we have this incredible
belief in individual rights that
everyone regardless of your sexuality or
gender your skin color although even
your nationality as long as you are an
American citizen should be treated the
same and by the way you know whenever I
say that people say well well black
people used to be slaves and women
couldn't vote that is true it is an
imperfect system created by imperfect
people but over time we have expanded
those rights to more and more people so
we freed the slaves we allowed black
people to vote we allowed women to vote
now gay people can get married and if
you were to show me any group of people
in the United States in 2020 that do not
have equal rights by the nature of some
immutable characteristic I would
absolutely fight for that what I don't
want to fight for is that because you're
a perceived marginalized oppressed group
or something like that or the history of
your people not you has has had a
rougher history or this or that or the
other thing that you're gonna get
special rights now because every time we
say Oh
well you don't have to be as qualified
to get into this college or you don't
have to be as qualified to get this job
or whatever now that kind of sounds
right oh we're trying to make up for
some historical thing except what you're
doing actually is punishing someone else
who doesn't deserve to get punished and
a great example of this is that Harvard
over the years has made it much harder
for Asian students to get in because
they had they had in their mind what was
too many Asians now that in my book
that's known as racism but they decided
we have too many Asians here so we're
gonna make it harder for Asians to get
in and we're gonna make it easier for
these other groups now why should we be
punishing a young Asian kid who busts
his ass whose parents or grandparents or
great-grandparents came here we're not
given anything just like your ancestors
weren't given anything in mind weren't
given anything and I write about what
life was like for my grandparents and
great-grandparents who came from Eastern
Europe with nothing and busted their
butts so that my parents could be a
little better off than they were and now
I'm better off than my parents that's
the American dream that's what most of
us have some part of but the idea that
we would say oh no no no you Asians
because you work too hard and you care
about education and you care about
school and blah blah blah
you guys are getting it you're getting
it off too easy we didn't give you
anything but you guys are just doing it
to good we're gonna now punish you
that's deeply dangerous so I think what
happens is a lot of people just sort of
have lazy thinking they only think about
it at the first day and they go oh well
this group had a rough go of it we best
help them even if it wasn't that
specific person it was generations
before we best help that person and that
kind of sounds right until you go well
alright are you for punishing someone
else and then they go oh I guess not and
then it's like yeah well then the
argument falls apart pretty quickly yeah
when you get into this stuff it's it's
really interesting so as somebody who
obviously has embraced capitalism in in
the extreme I'm a huge believer in
capitalism and at the same time like I
don't like to see people struggle so
I've and then again this is one of the
reasons I didn't have kids so it's it I
do not like people putting roadblocks or
barriers in front of somebody who wants
to bust their ass and build something
and that [__] you want
something talked about something that I
do have a very strong opinion about it's
the opportunity to build something for
yourself the opportunity to be rewarded
for adding value for working your ass
off all of that and so that's one thing
that I it it seems to me as somebody
who's not deep in this world admittedly
but when I see things on the fringes
where in fact I'll what do you think
about the I had it never once occurred
to me that people were reacting poorly
to the phrase pick yourself up by your
bootstraps or pull yourself up by your
bootstraps and then I started hearing
people you know saying oh they just pull
themselves up by their bootstraps I was
like wait what this is a negative thing
like the the notion of yeah working hard
and trying to figure something out now
I'm not denying look it's what I call
minimum requirements so there's
something out there not smart enough
dude they're never gonna make it and
they're [__]
and they are [__] through no fault of
their own genetic lottery absolutely
brutal maybe they were drug and alcohol
impacted I mean dude the the litany of
things that can end up being stacked
against you is so so so gnarly but talk
to me about your view on the notion of
pulling yourself up by your bootstraps
working hard trying to get ahead and
then the need yeah or maybe you don't
feel like we need to worry about people
getting left behind but that's sort of
where I struggle is like I don't want
people getting left behind by [__] me I
do not want somebody taking everything
that I'm trying to build to try to level
equal opportunity yay equal outcome
gnarly in the extreme and yeah so so you
so I agree with the premise you sound to
me very much like sort of an iron
Randian capitalist you believe that you
that the government from what I can
understand should basically get out of
the way so that as long as we have equal
rights right equal opportunity and and
by the way when people say equal
opportunity it doesn't mean we all start
at exactly the same thing it means that
the playing field is level but yes some
people are born into more money some
people are born smarter some people are
born with more athletic skill or better
looks or a series of different things so
there's no such thing as it just sort of
this magical equality right so what can
a society that has all sorts of people
do it can only I
think create an even playing field so
you've got a chance so pull yourself up
by your bootstraps it was funny AOC
Alexandria Acacio Cortez
she said well who's ever done that as if
it's a literal phrase I mean it was a
phrase at one time but you you can't
pull yourselves up by your bootstraps
you ever try to do that I mean the point
is that if you work hard if you work
hard in America you've got a chance and
nowhere in the world gives you a better
chance of doing that and by the way
there are also millionaires there are
children of millionaires who inherit
inherit all this money that go bust
because it because you still have to
work for it you still have to invest
properly you still have to know what
you're doing you can't just squander it
all away so I believe so your question
though was well what do you do about the
other people well first off it is proven
time and again over over now decades
that capitalist societies not yes they
make a lot of really rich people but
everyone rises with that right everybody
comes up with that the poorest people in
America are way richer than the poorest
people in third world countries and in
second world countries and and often
their quality of life is even better
than middle-class people in some of
these places they're not living in huts
you can be you can be sort of in the
bottom percentage in the United States
and have some sort of shelter and often
a TV and a washing machine and death it
at that uh maybe not the greatest life
in the world but you know you can you
can get by
that's because capitalism moves
everybody up it doesn't mean that
everybody is going to be rich but if the
question really is well what do you do
about those people what my preference
would be is rather than this giant
social safety net that we know doesn't
work if it ever worked then more and
more people would always be getting out
of it but what happens is people get
caught in it forever because once the
government starts giving you something
they start giving you sustenance so now
you can get a certain amount of food or
whatever your supplies you need are now
they give you also subsidized rent and
the rest of it well let's say you're I
mean the great I can give you a great
example my sister lives in in New York
City she's paying market price for a
two-bedroom apartment it's an obscene
amount of money something like five
thousand dollars for it's not even a
two-bedroom it's a converted one
they manufactured a second second
bedroom out of write some like five
thousand bucks that's market price for
it which by the way after Corona I think
will significantly go down because I
think people are gonna be moving out of
cities but that's a different thing
altogether in her building they also
have subsidized housing so there's
people in her building that have lived
there for generations that are paying
something like six hundred dollars a
month for the exact same apartment now
that sort of sounds nice right this
sounds kind of nice oh we're helping
poor people get apartments that's right
but what happens is and this is a fact
that we then find these people cannot
leave and then it becomes a generational
thing because why would you if you're
being given a six hundred dollar
apartment and the government even giving
you some money for that why would you
pick yourself up by the bootstraps bust
your ass and get a better job which then
would mean you wouldn't get that help
anymore and then you'd be kicked out of
that apartment and have to move
somewhere else so I don't blame the
people that get caught in this cycle I
blame the machine that is constantly
putting people into this cycle so if you
want to help people truly you unleash
the market to do everything it can which
will create more jobs and all of that
right you're a businessman you've
created jobs I'm a businessman I've
created jobs and then the hope is that
more and more people will work and then
figure out ways to rise themselves now
of course you are totally right that
there will always be people on the
margins because of mental health because
of a litany of reasons bad luck bad
choices drug addiction all of those
things that will always need some extra
help my preference would be that if the
government would mostly get out of that
game and I'm not saying completely I do
think there is some this is where I
would say although I'm mostly a
libertarian I you know I'm laying out
classically liberal principles in the
book and a classically liberal principle
would be that you want some guidelines
on society where a libertarian would
just sort of say completely get out of
the way with everything I would say we
can do something to help the people who
need it the most but just throwing money
at things is not the right answer what I
would prefer to do is you scale back as
much of that administrative state as
much of that social net as possible
even though I think it was
well-intentioned but the
- hell is paved with good intentions you
scale as much of that back as possible
and then you know who will step up good
people will step up I am sure you give
some money to charity I'm sure you do
some things for causes that you care
about I actually believe people want to
help more but the more that we just say
how the government will do it don't
worry about that the government doing
well then know what none of us think
it's our responsibility so we're all
willing to just have more of our
paycheck taken away so that the
government can do something highly
inefficient I just don't think it's
right and I think that if you want to
help people that and I'm guessing you
probably do in your own way that you'll
keep doing it and then we can have we
can have something for the really
extreme cases and by the way I will
fully admit this is not a perfect system
but there is no perfect system and part
of the problem right now with what's
happening with the progressives and the
Socialists is they just think that their
system will be perfect that they can
build a perfect system we'll have a
quality for everyone we'll have racial
harmony will have perfect economic
equality all of these things guess what
no it can't happen and it can't happen
because humans have to make the system
and we're imperfect right we are
imperfect so we can't create a perfect
system so I always say this is like this
is why Thanos killed half the universe
and Avengers right he knew that there
were finite resources in the universe
and he said it's the nobody's gonna do
what has to be done well what has to be
done I got to wipe out half the universe
so that we can have peace and harmony so
if you think that wiping out half the
universe is the right way to do it or
enslaving half the universe is the right
way to do it and then you do it but
there's no such thing as a perfect
system there's a there's a messy system
freedom is messy and the best thing you
can do is give it some basic guidelines
to keep that core piece in place yeah
when I think about the issue and I agree
with you it's messy and I honestly man
here is here's what I think is just the
gospel truth there's no way around it
there's no way around suffering there's
no way around seeing somebody's look
because their I mean if they are
literally they don't have the mental
faculties to execute at a high level
which unfortunately like anything IQ or
whatever metric you're going to use the
the real functional intelligence
maybe is impossible to measure but we
can all agree is either present or not
present they're just some people who
fall below that line and I don't know
barring anything so horrifying where we
start dictating the the genetic lottery
as you were saying despite me saying in
my own life I might be willing to choose
the sex it is a [__] terrifying so
for so anyway might so when I think
about what I would want to do so I've I
have achieved a lot in my life partly
through very good fortune for Shore
fortune favors have prepared make no
mistake I was ready to capitalize on
opportunities that came away but I'm not
a fool I don't think that my life is
devoid of luck there's been tremendous
amounts of luck in my life so when I
think about actually going in and
helping it is not obvious what the
answer is so one of my favorite stories
and I'm so desperate to get this guy in
the show because I'm almost certainly
mischaracterizing exactly what he did
but as I interpreted it there's a guy
named Geoffrey Canada Geoffrey Canada
grew up in Harlem during the crack
epidemic he realizes yo this is a
problem with education I'm going to get
a scholarship to Harvard I'm gonna get a
degree in education I'm going to go into
the system and I'm gonna fix it from the
inside and he does it then so bright and
so hard working ends up getting I think
a full ride to Harvard goes to Harvard
comes out and spends I think ten years
in education trying to fix it and then
he realizes you can't fix it from the
inside and this this is [__] haunted
me and I've quoted this so many times
it's why I'm so desperate to have this
conversation with him he said you have
to give up on adults and I was like oh
my god that was so bright and he said
even if you he goes look at the [__]
data and what the data is saying is the
difference between a kid who grows up in
the inner cities and a kid who grows up
middle class is the number of positive
words they hear by the age of five and
it's so massively impacts their the
language centers of their brain that
they either will be able to go on to
thrive or they won't and it's this thing
that really holds it back so we become
so obsessed with getting to women who
are pregnant or about to become pregnant
and I was like that's so genius that's
like target man target that's their game
[__] fine women ever praying
or about to become pregnant because you
can influence their buying behaviors for
the rest of their life you can influence
the child's buying behaviors and the
fact that he identified something so
simple as I never would have thought
that it's your impacting the language
centers of their brain which of course
is going to influence the number of
words they have which is going to
influence the concepts then grasp which
is going to influence their ability to
articulate themselves it's like really
terrifying the number of ways that
echoes through somebody's mind so that
seeds planted in my head yeah
well very quickly on that I mean
actually you're making what I think is a
pretty conservative argument which is
that basically what you're calling for
there is you want stable families
ultimately right because where is that
stuff gonna come from where you're gonna
care about those women where they're
gonna be treated properly and and be
able to have the time to eat right in
when they're pregnant and all of those
things what you want are stable families
so that over time because we all know
this we all know that there are a
million studies about this if you grow
up in a two-parent home you are way more
likely to make the right choices in life
and be successful and stay out of jail
and stay away from drugs and all those
things not perfectly of course and are
there single parents who are wonderful
obviously but if you look at the data
over time that we it's something we all
know but we're all sort of afraid to say
it like if you come from a strong family
it will have given you some sort of
bedrock at the bottom it'll give you
some sort of foundation like you were
gonna build a house and you want that
foundation to be kind of kind of solid
right or extremely solid and if you
don't have that it just opens up all
sorts of other opportunities and that
could get us into a whole other
conversation about why actually by
giving so much money to poor people that
you actually end up hurting the family
you incentivize women to have more kids
there's all sorts of studies on that
kind of stuff but that's a whole other
thing yeah it's interesting so when I
you're 100% right you quoted in your
book something that was very startling
which are the stats around people who
grow up without a father and how
impactful that is my parents did me a
solid which was they three weeks after I
left for college I'm the youngest three
weeks after I left for college my dad
moved out and I thought whoa like thank
you I never I don't know that I could do
that because he was unhappy for a very
long time
yeah but man because of that I felt net
world's most normal childhood don't have
any trauma for my parents getting
divorced or anything like that so very
very grateful for that but when I look
at the like what's really gonna solve
the problem right so I don't I am very
worried that we don't actually know how
to solve the problem we know some things
that don't work but we're it's sort of
like so here's I have a hypothesis I
think I know what would work now I'm
wise enough to recognize I don't think I
should be making policy anytime soon but
my hypothesis goes like this
so I'm my last company had 3,000
employees about a thousand of them group
hard as hell in the inner cities of
South Central Los Angeles Compton like
[__] crazy crazy and the kind of
story people used to think I grew up
poor my friend I did not grow up or I
now know what real poverty looks like
and I'm talking people I help my
stepfather while he bled to death from a
gunshot wound to the head my best friend
I watched and tried to hold his
intestines in as he bled to death
because he was shot point-blank range
with a shotgun in the stomach my sister
was shot to death in the heart with an
ak-47 in my front yard on and on and on
and I was just like Jesus Christ I'm
literally I'm looking out my window I
can see the [__] neighborhood right
so in my nice beautiful neighborhood I
see it's so fun close and they never
drive to go out so I'm interviewing all
these people and we're growing so fast
dude I'm having to interview people two
and three at a time we're high we grew
by 57,000 percent in her first three
years alone in manufacturing so that
just like the number of humans you have
to [__] higher and the rate at which you
have to hire them is pure insanity so at
the early stages everybody that was
brought into the company was interviewed
by me literally Barna janitor EVPs sales
didn't matter everyone in
I mean it was me and so I'm having to
come up with a way to interview people
very very rapidly and sort of cut to the
heart with who they are so I start
asking this magic Genie question and
magic Genie question goes like this
you're gonna be granted one wish and one
which only can ask for more wishes can't
cure cancer bring somebody back from the
dead I'm sorry you want so I want to
know like what what do you really want
and dude I must ask that question 250
times without fail every single person
gave me the same answer and they all
said 1 million dollars and I remember
thinking what the actual [__] it is a
magic Genie and you're going to ask for
a million dollars you can ask for a
trillion dollars you could ask for a
money printing machine that makes money
they accepted everywhere through all
time and I was just like why are they
not asking for an impossibly large
amount of money and then I realized for
them a million dollars was an impossibly
large amount of money and I was like
holy [__] we have a mindset problem we
have a frame of reference problem to be
very specific and the way that they
looked at the world was so capped they
had put a glass ceiling on themselves
their parents had told them the world
doesn't want somebody like you to
succeed like they actually tell their
kids words like that and I heard that
over and over and over and over
and while anecdotal man this is
anecdotal at scale this was a lot with
people and i was just like men so my
life's mission is because my wife and i
could have retired bought an island and
literally never thought about working or
money again and now we're working harder
than we've ever worked because my theory
is if you can give people the right
mindset they'll go down it's what I call
the only belief that matters if you
believe that through hard work and
deliberate practice you can gain new
skills and those skills have actual
utility in the world right it's not
about checking something off a list to
say I read this book it's about learning
architecture so you can build a bridge
that doesn't collapse when cars go
across it and that's transformative it
is the ability to change the world
around you I mean it cannot be
overstated how powerful the acquisition
of skills is so it was just like okay
how do we get people to realize put time
and energy into learning something that
matters
and you can change your life and change
the lives of those around you and the
more I went into that world the more I
hear people believing that they can't
move classes and I'm like whoa whoa it
is the belief that you can't move
classes that is [__] you up far more
than whatever in Justices there are in
the world and that's the [__] that
scares me like as somebody who sort of I
I politics freaks me out there's too
many things to learn about with Maya and
maybe my limited intellect I'm actually
perfectly fine to accept that but
personal responsibility is my [__]
obsession because that I know like you
can take and run with it and so just
wrap that up I will say but I don't know
even as hard as I'm going to influence
societal change how many people get
eaten by the world it's just like yeah
well well first off there's a lot there
but you're you're first up you're living
your words right like you're you're
actually you're not just saying this
stuff like oh this is what I believe and
I just believe it and it's self-evident
that it's true you actually put it into
practice and hire it as you said a 30 or
workforce a thousand people that came
from these areas and I would venture to
say that most of them probably have a
much better life for having the
opportunity to work at one of your
companies and then hopefully move their
way up and maybe get out of that
neighborhood if that's what they wanted
or the rest of it so that is the essence
of the of the American spirit like that
here's here's what real thing I'm
grappling with right now some of them
yes and there were amazing
transformation suit and it was it was
tear inducing material I mean people who
were like you didn't just change my life
you changed the life of my entire family
tree like this is gonna echo incredible
but I am haunted by the number of people
for whom it was just money so to give
you an idea we had one employee Reata
for almost a year she was amazing
amazing bright hard-working [__] you
couldn't push her around this woman knew
like just clarity of purpose not to be
intimidated by anybody she was amazing
she got her first
income tax return she'd never had an
income tax return before and she quit
because she'd never had that much money
before and I was like oh my god like
this is an intelligent woman a driven
woman but the frame of reference is so
crazy that we're not crazy so unhelpful
so dad yeah it sent her off in this
weird direction well I would say this
that that that shouldn't haunt you in
that you can't solve everyone's problems
right like you can yeah well that'd be
pretty lofty that's a pretty lofty goal
and and hope is moronic those you're
saying and I know that I just so I
really do find myself sketched out in
this weird space of like hey don't
[__] tell me what to do with my money
I'll do whatever the [__] I want and
[__] like people are really struggling
what do you do so but but but with that
in mind though so okay so you've built
businesses you've got money as you said
you can you can retire and go to an
island and that would be a pretty great
life probably right but you don't want
to do that yet and you're still busting
your ass well what's the what's the real
way to then make the most of that it
sounds to me like the real way to make
the most of that is you keep reinvesting
in your companies you keep coming up
with new ideas so more and more people
can partake in it now does that mean
that that woman isn't that the idea of
that woman isn't gonna keep coming
through the system and then suddenly
just breaking down in the middle of it
because she realizes she has no idea to
pay taxes or maybe you along the way you
learn the lesson that oh you know I'm
bringing in all these people who aren't
that educated who need all sorts of life
skills so one of the benefits that I'm
gonna give them which will end up being
a write-off for you is I'm gonna give
them a tax course that I'll pay for that
hopefully they won't have to deal with
that and that again it's you using your
money to expand knowledge to other
people which in turn it actually feeds
you because it's the ideas that you care
about and I think you and anyone that is
involved in business that actually wants
to help people I think that's how you do
it you don't turn to the government and
say you guys can just do it better
because there's just simply no evidence
of it there is no evidence
I have a quick question how are you how
do you think we should be handling the
crisis now with the number of people
filing for unemployment yeah so there's
a there's a lot to say about this so
first you know the as a general rule I
don't love government bailouts I don't
love them the government usually creates
all the problems you know we have big
banks that are too big to fail and then
what did we do we bailed them out and we
made them even bigger right more small
banks went away and then what we said
was too big to fail so you'd think maybe
you'd want to make it less big we
actually made it bigger so government is
always putting a bandaid on another
government problem because they find
another emergency to create something
bigger and even in this stimulus package
you know we gave 25 million dollars to
the Kennedy Art Center and then they
fired half of the musicians that are
there or something like that like we
know that the gut that you know the
politicians they put all this pork for
their own pet projects in and all that
nonsense that being said in in this case
where we are dealing with a truly
worldwide unprecedented event that has
shut down the global economy that not
only look first we've had pandemics
before right we've had the Spanish flu
before we've had the Black Plague I mean
there's been things but this one has
spread the world and also because we're
so interconnected now even if even if
coronavirus hadn't made it to the shores
of the United States if it had spread
across Europe spread across Asia and
everything else we'd still be feeling
some economic impacts of it so what I
would say would be a basically good idea
is you have to prop up businesses and
this is where where so many people get
things wrong they think if you help
business that means you hate the regular
guy well no businesses are the things
that employ the regular people so if you
help them right so so it's it's just a
flaw in logic because they think because
so many people are taught that business
is evil that big business is bad and
it's like no that is actually the engine
that keeps this whole thing going so I
would say you want to help business now
that doesn't mean you just give endless
cash to all giant corporations that
don't need money but certainly if you
can help out mom-and-pop stores if you
can help out you know people like right
now what
think there's like a couple things you
can do so if you can't pay your mortgage
right now I wouldn't want someone kicked
out of an apartment but it's not just as
easy so people will say all right freeze
mortgages it's not quite that easy
because then the landlords who own many
properties if they're not now getting
their income well now they're gonna go
out of business so everyone that just
throws these easy answers Oh give people
money Oh freeze mortgages all these
things they all sound right and then you
think about them for about usually takes
about four seconds and you realize that
they're they're much more complex than
that so I would say we want to do a
series of things right now to basically
help people so first off I don't know
that you can freeze mortgages but if you
are about to be kicked out of your
apartment or whatever it is the
government could say that for three
months were suspending evictions and
then you know as we figure out what's
going on here how long this is all gonna
last there'll be a kick back to the
building owners and the lenders and
things like that I would prefer not to
just give a ton of money to the banks
and let them kind of figure out what to
do with it we know that this didn't work
last time we gave all this money to the
banks and then they created all sorts of
other regulations that created all sorts
of other problems so what it really
comes down to is do you want to just in
a time like this when all these people
are unemployed and having all sorts of
problems is the best thing that the
government can do some people the pure
libertarian proach you do nothing you
let the market crash and crumble and
then through that human ingenuity will
reconstitute itself and smart business
people will do sorts all sorts of
interesting things but you let it hit
the pain point right like you let it
crumble so that it can rebuild i I think
intellectually that's a really
interesting exercise I don't know to
keep the wheels on a society if you
could ever do that
so the real argument then becomes if you
put that aside the real argument is well
do you do you prop up businesses or
people do you want to just put cash into
people's hands so that they can
absolutely make sure that they can pay
the bills buy the groceries make sure
that they can get their medicine things
like that and then you know help the
businesses I think there's a little bit
of both I think unfortunately what's
happened here is you know goddamn well
that literally not one congressman or
senator who signed that stimulus bill
read that thing nobody read that thing
it was like this if not like this or
this
that thing was massive nobody read it
they all stick in these ridiculous
things like diversity and inclusion
memos and all of this nonsense that has
nothing to do with coronavirus just to
to get their little pet project in there
and this again would be where I would
say you scale back the power of the
government you get what I would prefer
to do than any of it let people keep
more of their money I don't no matter
how many millions of dollars you have I
want you to have more of it because I
believe you know what to do with it
and I and I would say that exact same
thing for poor people and I would say
you know I lay out what I think is a
fair tax system in the book and
basically if I do this by the way but
that's from a position of ignorance how
do you think like is that only works if
we radically scale government back
basically yeah
radically scale it back what is
government really good at not only what
is it good at what was when the founders
framed the Constitution what they wanted
were this conglomerate of states to
govern themselves and then the federal
government would basically make sure
that the state's weren't warring the
federal government would take care of
the borders of the entire entity and
very little beyond that that really was
it
meaning if you lived in New York most of
the decisions that would impact your
life were made by the legislature in New
York the governor of New York and that
went for the same of all the states even
right now when America is at its best
it's at its best because the states are
doing their things so legalizing
marijuana is a great example of this
Colorado was one of the first states to
do it and everyone that didn't want it
to be legalized said they're gonna
legalize it and they're gonna be more
potheads and it's a gateway drug and all
these horrible things are gonna happen
in baba bhot and guess what none of that
happened actually
now it got legalized there's new
businesses selling it they're raising
tax revenue that you can use for our
other projects and all that that was
Colorado taking an experiment and now
you can export that experiment to other
states and if you don't like what's
happening in Colorado well then you can
move to Alabama where it's illegal or if
and so I would prefer that the states be
able to do as much as they possibly can
so when we talk about you know pulling
back government it's just that the
federal government was never supposed to
have this such power and the irony right
now is you know you've got a certain
Nadja people in the United States who
have been screaming for now for years
roughly that Donald Trump is Hitler and
his supporters are Nazis and yet at the
same time right now we're in a crisis
and what they want is more from the
federal government so they're saying oh
if only the federal government could do
more right now really so you want the
guy you've been calling Hitler for the
last four years to do more that doesn't
really make sense what I would prefer is
you give all of these guys less power
and the the exchange there is that when
it's your guy in power if you've scaled
back some of his power he can't do
absolutely everything you want him to do
but the beauty is that when it's the guy
that you hate right so in my case when
it's when it's Bernie Sanders who has
all the reverse ideas that I have if
we've scaled back the power enough he
can't do too much damage to that the
wheels will stay on regardless of the
extreme guys on both sides but the only
way you can't you that's what
unfortunately the the the progressives
of today who have way too much influence
they think if they could just get their
guys in that everything would be perfect
and that would be a dystopia for me so I
want to scale back the power so they
don't have a chance to do it and by the
way the same thing would go for the
authoritarians that might rise on the
right you have a book in your nightstand
forget on Liberty by John Stuart Mill it
was here the other day it's probably in
this room somewhere I brought it out for
something I don't see it right this
second back well we're surrounded but it
is if it's not in here it's in my night
band yeah you said that there were a few
key ideas that were really simple but
very profound that you'd like to come
back to oh yeah I mean well so much of
what I lay out at Dome / in this book is
are the base ideas of on Liberty by John
Stuart Mill I mean the core of it is
what we well a lot of it's really the
theme of everything we've talked about
here but beyond everything else the
individual is the only thing that
matters that that is the only way by
strengthening the individual all right
that that is how you will allow people
to flourish to make sure that the
government doesn't have too much power
over your life until you hit those
marginal issues where the government has
to do something so as I'm saying right
now corona wire
is one of those type of issues where
look what I love to leave this all up to
the states and let every state decide
how they want to deal with social
distancing or how they want to deal with
the bailout or whatever yes in a perfect
world I would like to do that but you
know what viruses don't care about
borders so if if this governor of New
Jersey let's say was doing everything
wrong with coronavirus and the governor
of New York was doing everything right
we got a problem because there's a
border there and the virus doesn't care
about the border so I fully acknowledge
that not everything can be done at the
super local level but in effect John
Stuart Mill who wrote on Liberty you
know what was it maybe a hundred years
before the fount No fifty years before
the founding of the United States maybe
something like that 1700s that he had
the right ideas that the only way that
you can allow people to be free the way
that you can allow the human experience
to flourish in them in the greatest way
possible is to not create a system that
will crush it don't take away people's
rewards just because you you have some
other desire to do with them let people
have what they earn find the little
moments where we need some some sort of
collective in the right sense of
government to do the little things but
the big things are better what what
could happen in your life right now that
you would really want the government
involved there could be a couple things
right like if your house was broken into
you might want the police but as a guy
that's doing pretty decent you also
might have some security you also might
have a gun in your house I mean there's
all sorts of things go to the post
office I mean if you think that the post
office which is run by the government
it's brittle is so brilliantly run and
then they'll say oh well we want you to
take there we want them to take our
health care too and it's like in the
post office your ask someone at the post
office for a pen they think that's like
asking for gold because they don't even
have pens at the post office so I think
we just have to be careful with with
what we ask for so liberty the book is
called
on liberty you can literally read it in
an hour and and liberty is the key of
all of this so hard right I guess but
one thing that I really want had to be
here somewhere
literally in the room this morning I
don't know where it went
one thing that really resonated with me
is jordan peterson and i know that you
spent a lot of time with him he's
somebody that i don't know anything
about in the early days I was hearing
headlines he sounded like a psychopath
and I was like yeah I don't know man and
then he just kept popping up on my
YouTube feed and so one day I was like
you know what [__] it like what is why
do people hate this guy so much let me
just hear him talk crazy for a minute
and so I clicked into one of his videos
and I was like wait a second this
actually like this is amazing this is
absolutely fantastic
and I and from there I ended up reading
his book maps of meaning which I
actually read before I read 12 rules for
life and it's somebody dance man oh my
god it's so good so I was changed by
Joseph Campbell's the power of myth
I mean book in change dude that book hit
me it influenced so much my life in
terms of rituals in terms of as somebody
who struggled to go from being a boy to
being a man like his ideas around hey
the lack of meaningful rituals is a real
problem
like we need these demarcation points
and so when I got married I went through
a ritualistic scarification to remind
myself I was different after my marriage
than before it's been profoundly
impactful so I read maps of meaning and
I'm like holy hell like this guy is he's
picked up I think he's even better than
Joseph Campbell he's picked up where
Joseph Campbell left off and is really
like shown how usable and powerful this
has been in in his life I had two
questions or in people's lives I have
two questions for you one do you have
any updates like what the [__] where is
he what happened like is he gonna be
okay and then - I'd love to know I know
you spent a lot of time touring with him
like what were some key things that
you've taken from him yeah so the first
one I can't say anything that isn't
really public I can say that I did see
him within the last couple months he's
getting better he will be back you know
we was able to write the the front blurb
on my on my book and the back blurb and
he's working on his book you know benzos
are a [__] hell of a drug and you
know there was this meme that somehow he
was this like addict for all this time
and blah blah blah and it's like
it's not only so patently dishonest but
he was totally when we were on tour he
would talk about taking a small amount
of benzos to help him deal with anxiety
then in the midst of the tour he found
out that his wife had what they thought
was terminal cancer thank god she's okay
now but I was actually with him out to
lunch when he got the call that she was
sick or that they that they thought it
was going to be terminal I saw this guy
lived through a year and a half almost
two years of an unimaginable life rise
to fame the scrutiny the loved the hate
the travel every piece of it and I never
saw him once break one of those twelve
rules so so the first part of the
question he will be back soon enough my
my guess is we'll be hearing from him
probably a little bit in the summer and
then probably back to somewhat like
normal speed probably in the fall don't
totally quote me on that but trust me I
know the amount of people that are
pulling for him because I get messages
and people literally come up to me on
the street and I think they want to ask
me something about me and they'll say
how is Jordan and that's completely fine
with me because he affected me as much
as he affected any of these other people
which gets me to your to your second
question being on tour with this guy it
was incredible because I saw somebody
doing exactly what I think we've tried
to do here for this last hour or
whatever it isn't and what I sense
you're trying to do with your life which
is you take your ideas you put them into
practice and then through that have been
able to help other people that's pretty
cool and I think really that's what
Jordan did he really he created these
twelve rules you know from from stand up
straight with your shoulders back which
is present yourself properly to the
world right from that sort of simple
rule to you know pet a cat if you see
one on the street which is really just
stop and smell the roses and you know I
think it's rule number six is it's
either six or nine you know about know
that somebody that you're talking to
might know more than you I mean these
sort of basic things that I don't think
any I don't think in and of themselves
that any of the twelve are totally
revelatory and I don't think he would
think they are but he gave them together
as a package that I think for whatever
reason the reason that it worked for you
the reason that it
for me the reason why I worked for so
many people was that something has
happened in the last 20 years partly as
we're watching our old institutions
crumble partly as we're watching the
media just feed us awful nonsense partly
the rise of YouTube and a million other
voices a lot of people kind of lost
their way
within that I don't it's a partly
probably because of what we talked about
before about helicopter parents or
distant parents or all of these things
right like that whole mix that whole
stew and what I saw was a clinical
psychologist from Toronto who is this
mild-mannered sounds like Kermit the
Frog guy travel the world and help
people I mean help people in the most
fundamental ways I'll tell you two quick
things so one of them we were in Dublin
and you know when you give these big
talks at these theaters you know there's
a huge entrance out front and then
there's usually an artist entrance on
the side so that you don't have to walk
in or out through all the fans and
everything so you know we did a ton of
travel I think we got to Dublin that day
I think from the UK you know there's
there's jetlag there's just like the
endless amount of emails reading
articles about himself that our lives
doing the press all that stuff but he
never phoned it in he gave a different
talk every night which is staggeringly
incredible I don't know that anyone can
do that besides him anyway it's late
night it's probably like midnight after
a very very long day he's given a talk
he's done the Q&A he's shook all the
hands taking all the pictures we walk
out the side and we see these two guys
in the distance and they're kind of
hugging and they kind of run right at us
and one of them was about 60 the other
one was about 25 maybe 30 and it turned
out that they were a father and son who
had not seen each other for like five or
six years before that they had had a
falling-out and by coincidence because
of reading 12 rules for life they had
started getting their lives in order and
they were at the same show together and
saw each other and reconnected that
night so there they are crying now
Jordan starts crying I I teared up a
little bit it's like think how
profoundly powerful that is not because
this guy was selling them something
right like it was like selling snake oil
not because he was trying to make a
profit off these guys but he says
get your [__] in order get your life in
order and you might be able to get the
world in order right
clean your room before you clean the
world and that's what these guys did and
they reconnected that night incredible
another one real quick was a night that
we were we were somewhere in Scandinavia
I think maybe in Sweden and the guy
that's running the jet bridge runs on to
the plane and it's a young black guy and
he says to Jordan he says I and I only
mention that he's black by the way
because if you listen to the press they
were saying oh it's all angry white men
that listen to Jordan Peterson I
couldn't care what what you know what
race this guy is he runs onto the plane
he says I could get fired for this but I
just have to tell you I've read 12 rules
for life you fixed my life I got this
job I'm doing great blah blah blah
Jordan gets up shake his hand the guy
was glowing like beyond beyond glowing
and I could give you a million a million
stories like that so I saw something
real I saw real true change I'll give
you one other real quick we're in this
one was in Stockholm for sure I go to
H&M which is their number-one export
besides IKEA from Sweden and I just
wanted to get a baseball cap because it
was it was really windy out and I walk
in I grab the cap and then I'm on line
and there's a young guy in front of me
and the cashier and they're speaking in
English the young guy has a suit he
tells the cashier he's like I'm going to
see Jordan Peterson tonight this is my
first suit that I've ever bought the
cashier says I'm going to see Jordan
Peterson tonight and then I tap on the
guy and I said me too and they knew who
I was and we talked for a little bit and
I thought how absolutely incredible this
is this young kid out of I was probably
19 years old is buying a suit so that he
can dress up so that he can stand up
straight with his shoulders back and
attend an event of a guy who helped him
turn his life around and I gave him I
gave him a shout-out at the show that
night and had you know 2,000 people
cheering for him I had him stand up in
his in his new suit so I saw real
tangible change and there's so little of
that in life and it and it comes with it
comes with flings it comes with arrows
you know it comes with arrows that are
sometimes being shot up that are gonna
come right down on you because you know
you start talking to media without
knowing that they're trying to get you
and the rest of it but it was it was a
magical year and a half and I have no
doubt that he'll he'll eventually be
back and better than ever
man yeah that'll be that'll be great to
see that notion of everything coming
down to you and taking responsibility
for your life and man I I will never
understand push back on that like I I
actually don't get it I don't get how
somebody could think that things will be
worse if they look inward take
responsibility I've told the story so
many times I'll give a truncated version
but the very first blog article I ever
wrote it was my first foray into
stepping from sort of behind the company
and not being the face or anything to
being the face and I wrote this blog
article and I wanted it to be like the
greatest gift I could give like the the
thing deepest inside me that I had
learned that it changed my life forever
the the gift that I've been trying to
give to all my employees cuz I used to
do this is back at Quest I used to do
what I called quest University where I
was like look I will teach you anything
and everything that I know about
entrepreneurship going back to the very
first thing I was talking about I always
thought that was how is gonna reach
people and the mindset stuff just came
because that that's the primer right if
you get that right then you can build a
business or be a linchpin in your life
would be a better parent or whatever
like it it is all going to come down to
the foundation of how you think how you
interpret the world like just the way
you look at things and so I write this
blog article and it the title of it is
everything is your fault and the
punchline was imagine getting hit by a
drunk driver whose fault is that and I'm
like it's your fault I thought people
are gonna be like yes this is amazing
and people were pissed and they were
have your victim blaming and when you do
this this is crazy
and I'm like look in a world where even
the insurance company is going to tell
you that it's the drunk drivers fault I
just want to remind you you could have
made a different choice and gotten a
different outcome that's rad that's so
empowering and to like being empowered
even though that means you have to own
your suffering even though if things are
not going well you've got to turn around
and say yo like there's I could do
something different and get a different
outcome so I can't just pass the buck I
can't make this somebody else problem in
my thing is even
even if just [__] the data shows this
isn't your problem you didn't create
this this is happening to you
it doesn't help it doesn't help it
doesn't know it puts you in a position
you're you're not solution oriented well
just to go off that real quick you know
it it's first off that's very consistent
with everything else you're saying which
is nice it shows that you have like a
holistic view of the world that this
isn't just like some tape together
Frankenstein monster that like sort of
makes sense right like this this
consistently makes sense but so
specifically answer your question about
how you can't understand the mindset of
the other people it's really interesting
because I think even the people that
that purport to believe that it's it
everything's you it's not your fault
it's the system and corruption and blah
blah blah I think if you if you took
them at a really individual level most
people know and you can get them to
realize they won't you know it'll take a
couple of conversations that it's their
life and that it is on them to fix it I
think intuitively we know that we know
that because it's the story that has
made us come this far I mean I say this
in the book this thing about what are
what are all the stories that you care
about what did Luke Skywalker do when he
realized what the Empire was doing he
blew up the Death Star he didn't ask
someone else to do it I mean every movie
what did what did Frodo do with the ring
he didn't say I could somebody else get
that thing to Mordor he went on the
quests himself I mean every every story
every forget fictitious stories what is
what does LeBron James do in basketball
you know what I mean he dragged a whole
bunch of very average teams eventually
to Championships he lost a lot of
championships too he lost more
championships than he won but everyone
it's on you to make the best of the
world not to just complain about
everything and I think most people do
understand that I think what I'm more
scared about and I'm more scared per se
what a more generally fearful of is that
there are bad actors who want to use
that emotion use that fear use that
feeling of uselessness to control people
and that's what societies do so when we
hear all these ideas about socialism and
all that that are the complete reverse
of everything we've talked about here
it's oh it's not sold as something scary
which it is meaning that the government
can do whatever it wants basically at
any time and you're gonna owe everything
to the government what is it sold as
it's sold as compassion we're all gonna
have a part of everything where
everyone's gonna have health care we're
all gonna be nice everyone's gonna go to
college everyone but that's not real
it's not real and it's actually removing
the most human part of us which is the
part to fight for what's yours that's
what you must do as a human being or
don't do it and see see how it turns out
yes ma'am [__] a big issue that we could
do a whole nother I mean really that's
largely what this entire thing has been
about but man don't burn this book was a
really interesting read it was really
you're not trying to hide you lay out
all your ideas for the world to see I
think it's pretty interesting I respect
the way that you are always willing to
change and even just watching since you
started interviewing people watching you
change and evolve it's been really
interesting and and I think so early on
in the book talking about coming out of
the closet it's something that really
rings true with how you live your life I
think that's dope man working people
connect with you get the book find out
more
you're not exactly an invisible person
on the internet so I'm sure a lot of
people know but for the people don't
someone find you they could probably
figure it out my Brandon guy is pretty
good it's Rueben report calm and Twitter
Rueben report and Instagram Reuben port
all that and it's don't burn this book
comment or they can get it on Amazon or
Barnes and Noble and the rest of it and
and I just would say I've thoroughly
enjoyed this like this is what this is
what real conversation is all about this
is this is how you push things forward
because you show people that these
aren't just everything we've talked
about here these aren't just things
we're talking about they're things we're
trying to live so once this coronavirus
passes let's break bread in real life
like real people you know like we did
when we were kids remember you can go
out to a field with other people it was
a long time ago but I ride as days
awesome and I'm sort of that that'd be
great right on man it was a pleasure
like definitely guys thank you so much
that's the end of the episode normally
this is where I shake hands and push the
microwave so to take care of takes care
of itself but
these days no mics which way hi brother
thank you so much man you're right about
the matrix for 50 years we've been
suppressing the really interesting new
ideas and calling names on anybody who
would propose ideas that would point out
the unstable nature of art market
democracy